# Introduction to Bitcoin Enterprise

## SYLLABUS
Introduction to Bitcoin
Enterprise
Introduction to
Bitcoin Enterprise
- Summary
    Introduction to Bitcoin Enterprise
Summary
- Introduction
     Introduction


- About BitcoinSV
     Introduction
     Safe, Instant Transactions at a Predictably Low Cost
     Reliably Low Fees
     Comparison to Legacy Transaction Systems
     Payment Channels
     Scalability to Accommodate Global Demand
     Big Blocks Show Big Potential
     A Plan for Regulatory Acceptance
     Ready-made Compliance Tools
     The Open BSV License
     The Bitcoin White Paper
     Protocol Stability
     Building Foundations on a Bedrock of Stone


- Technical Details
     The Network
     The Small World Network
     Robust In Its Unstructured Simplicity
     The Bitcoin Satoshi Vision Node Client
     Teranode - The Future of Bitcoin
     The Protocol - Simple, Robust and Unbounded
     What is the Bitcoin Protocol?
     1. Block Headers
     2. Transactions
     Proof of Work
     The Algorithm
     Efficiency of Proof of Work
     Privacy and Identity
     Permissions, Privacy and the Metanet


- Resources and Tools
     The Technical Standards Committee
     TSC Principles
     Standard Development Process
     Status of Current and In-progress Standards
     Future Roadmap
     The Working Blockchain
     Pruning to Create a Working Blockchain
     Building a Working Blockchain from a List of Block Headers
     A World View Backed by Proof of Work
     The Metanet and the New Internet of Value
     The Metanet Protocol



## Introduction to Bitcoin Enterprise Summary
> Learn how Bitcoin and the BitcoinSV network can radically change how digital services are provided.

The purpose of this course is to give answers to questions such as:
- What is the difference between BSV and Cryptocurrency?
- What are blocks?
- What are transactions?
- Separation of blockchain vs transaction ledger
- Working blockchain - Pruning vs SPV and block linked databases
- Why fixed protocol?
- What is a 'private blockchain'?
- Why is Proof of Work superior vs Proof of Stake/Authority?
- Why is proof of work inefficient for BTC but efficient for BSV and more efficient at scale?



## About BitcoinSV

### Introduction
As we look back at the rapid change that has taken place across the fields of information technology, payment services and finance over the last few decades it's easy to identify a pattern of increasing digitisation of systems formerly dominated by paper.
From letters to email, cheques to EFTPOS, wet ink to digital signatures and printed paper to digital files, as water soaks into a sponge digital technology has seeped into every tool we use to manage the course of our personal and business relationship As Bitcoin has emerged over the last decade, much hype has been made about the prospect of it acting as a technology layer to facilitate the further disintermediation of our digital financial and data activities. The network's success heralds a move from a system where ledgers held by each business or institution are kept as separate records reconciled periodically at great effort and expense, to a new paradigm where a global network of third-party nodes manages a single ledger of all business activities. The ledger's scale and efficiency mean transaction costs can be reduced to heretofore unseen levels providing ways to take separate payment at the micro-amounts for fully individualised services. Correct use of the ledger can facilitate triple entry accounting leaving a single record all parties to a transaction can reference and allowing for rapid single-click audit systems synchronised to the second.
When examining alternatives to Bitcoin in the blockchain/digital currency landscape, it can be difficult to disambiguate the wide variety of systems that have been developed to manage public ledgers and challenging to discern whether a project is able to manage the levels of activity that could be generated by its open and unbounded use by enterprise and government.
At the same time, it can be quite easy to see where projects are nothing more than well branded schemes for groups of early insiders to get rich hyping vapourware to naive retail investors in an unregulated market.
Bitcoin was designed from first principles to act as a high performance, reliable and low-cost public network and ledger. The protocol is unbounded and provides us with an opportunity to provide high-speed, low cost financial, communication, data and technology services on a global scale.
Bitcoin is not an exclusive system that only the wealthy or the early can use, but a general-purpose network and ledger usable by all people as a backbone for communication, education and commerce. 
BitcoinSV, as the network that **manages the Bitcoin ledger**, eschews the 'blockchain' industry narrative of pure speculation as 'investment', **focusing solely on building for performance**.
Bitcoin is privately owned infrastructure, available to the public 24/7/365, and works much faster and for a tiny fraction of the cost of the multitude of legacy systems needed to replicate just a small part of its native functionality.


### Safe, Instant Transactions at a Predictably Low Cost
From the outset, Bitcoin was designed with scalability in mind. In order to scale to a system capable of managing global demand, some less intuitive design choices were made. These choices determine how we manage the accounting of tokens on the network, how the tokens operate when they are exchanged and much more.
Elements such as the low-level scripting language, which resembles an early assembly-like language called Forth, counterintuitive data formats and innovative economic assumptions have made becoming an expert in the technology difficult and demanding. As a result, Bitcoin's idiosyncratic design choices have not been well understood leading to erroneous beliefs such as that it can't scale without additional layers or is not flexible enough to provide features like smart contracts.
These naive assumptions have resulted in years of debate and eventually led to developers changing the base protocol, permanently altering its incentive structure and preventing it from scaling.
In response to the self-imposed scaling and functionality limitations, a plethora of attempts to solve them have sprung up, collectively known as 'cryptocurrency'. Unlike Bitcoin, which was borne out of decades of research, cryptocurrencies have little to no research or academic basis. The idea that 'crypto' can solve blockchain scaling by creating a multitude of blockchains for every conceivable use-case has ultimately led to it not being able to provide any use-case beyond market speculation.
The Bitcoin protocol was designed to support any and all kinds of transaction. From secure time-locked trusts, hierarchical accounts, streaming or conditional payments, complex transactions can be defined in a scripting language and wholly managed by the network, radically reducing the cost of business management and customer interaction.
Thanks to tremendous contributions from professional research and development teams the changes made to the underlying Bitcoin protocol under erroneous assumptions have been almost entirely reverted, and the protocol in use on the BitcoinSV network has been returned to as close to the original Bitcoin protocol as possible.
Development of the node client software has leveraged Satoshi's seemingly unconventional design choices leading to massive breakthroughs in network throughput, capacity and capability. ** The development of infrastructure and software continues with the upcoming release of Teranode, a completely reworked node client particularly suited to cloud micro-service architectures. **


### Reliably Low Fees
The Bitcoin network is built to accommodate at least an order of magnitude more transactions than the typical demand generates so that there is no market-based fee pressure such as is seen on other blockchain networks. This allows miners to set low, stable transaction prices for users. Bitcoin was always meant to scale without limits, and it’s this scaling that drives a positive user experience, and a sustainable block reward.
As more transaction volume is processed by the network, fee revenue increases for the miners and competitive forces imply that transaction processing will be offered by more capable nodes at the best possible rate. This competition ensures that as the network accommodates more and more volume, and fees come down, more use cases will become economically viable at a cheaper fee rate, and volume will increase rewarding the more capable nodes who broker deals to process the cheaper transactions. This combination of supply and demand and economies of scale means that as the network throughput increases, it will create more use cases and society will reap the many benefits of this increased efficiency in interoperability, accountability and value capture.


### Comparison to Legacy Transaction Systems



### Payment Channels



### Scalability to Accommodate Global Demand
One of the most important aspects of the Bitcoin system is its ability to scale without bounds, giving it the potential to manage hundreds of millions or even billions of transactions every second.
In 2009, Bitcoin was released with no limits on block-size, transaction size, script complexity or use of opcodes. Between 2010 and 2017, numerous changes were made to the baseprotocol that restricted its ability to scale. However, since 2018, teams developing the BitcoinSV node client software have worked to restore Bitcoin to its original unbounded protocol design.
In addition to its unbounded incentive structure, Bitcoin script also comes with opcodes future proofing it to work well with IPV6, and extra opcodes to add additional hashing functions if needed.
Furthermore, as IPV6 subsumes IPV4, Bitcoin will become instrumental in supporting the anticipated billions of IoT devices expected to come online.
By way of micro-transactions, Bitcoin will be the global validation and timestamping service providing an effective way to clean data and communications, maintaining integrity and supercharging AI & Machine Learning.
As the ideas of the Metaverse and Web3 are turned into real products and services, a dedicated technological substrate capable of processing hundreds of transactions per user each hour will be critical. Realising these products and services will be otherwise impractical or maybe impossible due to the inefficiency of legacy data and payment networks which aren't designed from the ground up with these usage conditions in mind.


### Big Blocks Show Big Potential
### A Plan for Regulatory Acceptance
### Ready-made Compliance Tools
### The Open BSV License
### The Bitcoin White Paper
### Protocol Stability
### Building Foundations on a Bedrock of Stone